iOU College of Medicine student co-authors breakthrough study on stroke prevention
Maria DeCosta, news reporter  03/08/19
 1 min to read

Tyler Zander
OU third-year medical student Tyler Zander.
Photo provided by April Sandefer
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Print
Save
After a recent study from an OU Medicine trauma surgeon and an OU College of Medicine student, new guidelines for preventing strokes in patients who have suffered a blunt traumatic injury have been discovered.

According to a press release, Amanda Celii, M.D., and Tyler Zander, a third-year medical student, were authors on a study focused on blunt cerebrovascular injuries (BCVIs) – injuries to the blood vessels of the neck. These are commonly caused by the force of a seat belt or fractures in the neck.

“Essentially, BCVIs occur when the blood vessels are injured or bruised in a way that clots can form, which can cause a stroke,” Celii said in a press release.

advertisement
These injuries have been treated in various ways across the country. This specific study aimed to determine how soon strokes occur after an injury to the blood vessels, and how soon blood thinners should be given in an effort to prevent stroke, according to the press release.

The study showed the majority of patients who suffer a BCVI-related stroke do so in the first 72 hours after the injury occurs. That means blood thinners like aspirin should be given to the patient immediately, Celii said.

The study also showed that blood thinners may increase the risk of bleeding. However, it was found that the risk of stroke within 72 hours outweighed the risks of giving the blood thinner.

advertisement
Receiving author credit on a research publication is unusual for a medical student, but Zander has a particular drive, Celii said. When students are part of that process and develop mentors with faculty members, they tend to learn the intricacies of surgery better, she said.

“I have an interest in what we do and why we do it, looking at our protocols and gathering information that leads to the best practices,” Zander said in a press release. “This study is a good example of how we can conduct studies to improve medicine.”
